# Chapter 2. Building the page at runtime

Topics Covered:

- Lifecycle of a web application
- How HTML is processed to produce a web page
- Order of JS code execution
- Interaction through events
- The event loop

## Do You Know? (Pre-Chapter Knowledge Check)

1. Does the browser always build the page exactly according to the given HTML?
    - Browsers will build the page according to the provided HTML, but that HTML can
      be altered by a variety of languages (JavaScript, CSS, etc.) or programs 
      (the browser itself) either _after_ or _before_ the given HTML page is built.

2. How many events can a web application handle at once?
    - A JavaScript web application can handle one event at a time.
3. Why must browsers use an event queue to process events?
    - Browsers implement an _event queue_ to keep track of the order in which 
      events have taken place.

----------
## 2.1. The Lifecycle Overview

Typical Client-Side Web Application Lifecycle:
  
  1. User types a URL into the browser's address bar or clicks a hyperlink.
  2. Browser creates a request on behalf of the user, and sends the request to 
      a server.
  3. Server processes request, generates a response (generally HTML/CSS/JS code), 
      and sends the response back to the browser.
  4. Browser receives response from the server, and generates a user interface 
      as described by that response.
  5. Browser listens for events.
  6. Application invokes event handlers corresponding to occuring events.
  7. Application ends when user navigates away from the web page.

----------
## 2.2. The Page-Building Phase

Steps:

  1. Parse HTML to build the Document Object Model:
      - Performed when browser processes HTML nodes
  2. Execute JavaScript code:
      - Performed when browser encounters `script` tag

The browser switches back and forth bewtween these steps as necessary.

### 2.2.1. Parsing the HTML & Building the DOM

  - The browser receives HTML code from the server and uses it as a base for creating 
      the application's UI by parsing through the one HTML element at a time and 
      building a structured representation of the HTML page (DOM), in which every
      HTML element is represented as a node. 
  - Each HTML node can have only **ONE** parent, **MULTIPLE** children, and **MULTIPLE**
      siblings (nodes that share the same parent node).

[HTML5 Guide by Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/HTML5)  
[DOM API Guide by Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model)


> **NOTE:** Though HTML and the DOM are closely linked (DOM is initially constructed from HTML),
>  the two aren't synonymous. HTML code can be thought of as the _blueprint_ which the browser
>  follows when contructing the initial layout of the application UI (DOM). Blueprints can be 
>  modified as necessary. :)

  If the browser encounters a `script` element while parsing through the HTML elements, it 
    pauses DOM creation and begins executing the JavaScript code.

### 2.2.2. Executing JavaScript Code

JavaScript code is executed by the browser's JavaScript engine:

  - Firefox (SpiderMonkey)
  - Chrome (V8)
  - Opera (V8)
  - Edge (Chakra)
  - Safari (Nitro)

Primary differentiatior being compilation methods and speed. Browsers also provide an
API through a globally accesible object which the JavaScript engine uses to interact 
with and modify the page.

`window` Object in JavaScript:

  - The `window` object is the window in which an app is contained. All other globally
      available objects, variables (including user-defined variables), and browser APIs are
      available _through_ the `window` object. JavaScript uses this object to alter the DOM
      by changing/adding/removing DOM elements.

[Web API Guide by Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API)

JavaScript code can be broadly differentiated into two types: _global_ or _function code_. _Global
  code_ is executed automatically by a browser's JavaScript engine and is interpreted in a linear, 
  line-by-line manner. _Function code_ isn't executed until it's **called upon**; defining
  a function doesn't invoke it (in most cases), so to run the process defined in the function the
  program (or the JavaScript engine, or the browser) has to be told to call it by specifying
  the function name, followed with matching parenthesis that contain user-provided arguments
  or arguments that are required by the function.

All user-defined global variables that are defined during the program's runtime remain within
  the global `window` object unless the window is closed or the variable is over-written.

----------
## 2.3. Event Handling

Once the browser has completed parsing through the HTML document, it moves on to the second 
step of the standard web app lifecyle: _event handling_.

### 2.3.1. Event Handling Overview

The browser is based on a _single-threaded execution model_; only a single piece of code can be 
  executed at one time. This means that the browser processes events one at a time, and utilizes
  an _event queue_ to store all generated events in the ordered that the browser processed them.
  The event handling flow can be described by the following flowchart:

  - Browser checks the event queue head.
  - If no event exists, browser continues to check.
  - If an event exists, the browser executes the corresponding event handler (if one exists).
      While this event is being processed, any other events that get added to the queue 
      wait for this event's process to complete.

Events occur and are responded to in asynchronous (AKA unpredictable) fashion. As such, we
  handle the invocation of event-handling functions in the same manner. Code is written
  and set up well before an event ever occurs, and waits to be called upon and executed as
  needed. In order to 'listen' for events, our progam needs to alert the browser of
  which events it has handlers for.

### 2.3.2. Registering Event Handlers

There are two ways to register event handlers:

  1. Assign functions to special properties
  2. Use built-in `addEventListener()` method

Best practice is to use the `addEventListener()` method; allows for multiple handlers 
for any given event, where as assigning functions to special properties limits us
to one handler per event.

### 2.3.3. Handling Events


